[2020 in RoguelikeDev] Elephant! and Tetraworld

**Elephant!**

An elephant simulation game, in which you play the role of an African elephant
trying to survive in the wilderness. Core mechanic is survival and navigation:
finding food, water, and minerals in a harsh wilderness, surviving predators
and poachers, managing other herd members, and rising in rank in elephant
society.


**Tetraworld (working title)**

A roguelike set in 4D space, where the map occupies not 2, not 3, but 4
dimensions of space. Features 4D gravity, which adds a whole new dimension(!)
of interest in map generation, movement mechanics, and exploration.  The core
mechanic is exploration and tactical maneuvers.


**2019 Retrospective**

These projects have been around for years but have been sitting on the
backburner collecting dust, until late 2019 when I stumbled across
/r/roguelikedev and the Roguebasin articles, which inspired me to start with a
narrower scope and get a core working game first, instead of reaching for the
skies but never getting out of the well.

So I started working on *Elephant!* again.  Before this, there was only a bunch
of E's (for **e**lephant) moving around randomly on a featureless map, but
within a few months I had an actual game loop, a semi-nice ASCII UI, xterm
256-color mode, an ECS system (or rather, an EC store), a plot, the beginnings
of an AI system that has herbivores seeking for and eating food and carnivores
hunting and eating prey, and a preliminary win condition.  Pretty good progress
for a spare-time hobby!

The end of 2019 saw a pause in *Elephant!*'s development, however, due to
getting stuck in over-engineering a complicated AI action system that may or
may not be warranted at this point.  Out of frustration, I turned to
Tetraworld, another backburner project that had been collecting dust for years.

Tetraworld was actually an attempted rewrite of an even older 4D maze game I
wrote more than a decade ago. It was left in a skeletal, barely-working state,
but thanks to lessons learned from the *Elephant!* project, and thanks to
liberally borrowing from *Elephant!*'s codebase (hence my SS jokes about
pachyderms leasing out their code), within a month Tetraworld has expanded by
leaps and bounds, and now has BSP-tree based mapgen, gravity, a
ladders-and-pits exploration mechanic, collectible plot tokens, a win
condition, rudimentary monsters, nice ASCII animations for vertical and
ana/kata movements, and just this week, an ability to record sessions that can
be replayed into animated gifs.


** 2020 Outlook **

This year, the hope is resume work on *Elephant!* and produce an MVP (minimum
viable product): a minimal but fully-functional game that can be played from
start to finish.  While *Elephant!* and *Tetraworld* are drastically different
games, in terms of code they have a lot in common, and have been feeding off
each other; I've learned a lot from working with Tetraworld's code, and this
has given me a much better idea of how to get through the current impasse in
*Elephant!*.  I had planned for an MVP by December 2019, but clearly that was
*far* too ambitious.  :-D  The saying is true, that writing a roguelike is
*far* more complex than it first appears!

The main features for *Elephant!*'s MVP is planned to be:

* Basic survival mechanics (food, water, minerals, protection from the
  elements);

* Herbivores (mainly decorative for the time being), predators and combat
  mechanics.

* A challenge system for rising in male elephant rank, with some target rank
  (say reaching rank 50 to win the game).

All will be challenging to implement because I've yet to work out all the
intricacies of how these mechanics will interact. Hopefully the code will be
back in shape once I start working on these issues.


For Tetraworld, this year's plan is to add:

* More interesting terrains, in particular, "4D water" (for lack of a better
  term!) where the player gets full degrees of freedom in movement (not
  constrained by gravity). This will drastically change the exploration
  mechanic, and I think will be very interesting!

* Simulation of 4D ecosystems, so that generated levels will feel "lived in".
  Things like water flow in 4D, creatures and ecosystems that spring up around
  it, etc., will be extremely interesting, because in 4D there are certain
  novel characteristics that cannot be found in 3D, and it will be great fun to
  explore them in the context of a roguelike!

* A 4D city where the player can setup a home base of sorts: it will gradually
  grow from a bare minimum settlement into a full-fledged thriving city as the
  player progresses.  The game will *not* become a city sim -- that's not the
  goal -- but the player's actions will have consequences on the city, which in
  turn will have consequences for the player (like the availability of shops,
  resources, etc.).  Again, there are novel characteristics about 4D that will
  have dramatic consequences on the structure of the city, and will be very
  interesting to explore.


**Links**

* [Elephant! website](http://eusebeia.dyndns.org/elephant/)

* [Tetraworld website](http://eusebeia.dyndns.org/tetraworld/)

Pre-alpha binaries for Linux and Windows console are available on each website.
