[2020 in RoguelikeDev] Tetraworld

A roguelike set in 4D space, where the map occupies not 2, not 3, but 4
dimensions of space. Features 4D gravity, which adds a whole new dimension(!)
of interest in map generation, movement mechanics, and exploration.  The core
mechanic is exploration and tactical maneuvers.


**2020 Retrospective**

In last year's event I said that the plan was get back to working on
*Elephant!* again.  Well, that didn't happen...  I learned the hard way that
writing a roguelike is not only much more complex than it first appears, it
also consumes far more time than one might imagine.  Running *two* projects
simultaneously just isn't workable, given my other priorities. So, sadly, this
means that *Elephant!* did not see any progress at all.

As for Tetraworld's planned goals last year, the only one that was met was the
addition of 4D water -- and even that was only in rudimentary form (currently
literally just a single integer water level in the map, no rivers, water
currents, waterfalls). The other two goals: 4D ecosystems and a 4D city are
nowhere within grasp yet.

Furthermore, I got burned out in the middle of the year, so there was no
progress for about 4 months.

Nevertheless, what little water mechanics are there have already led to an
unexpectedly fun new mechanic: diving.  Drowning mechanics, limited lung
capacity, and diving gear with limited air supply, led to a series of
interesting gameplay mechanics: carefully-planned dives to maximize distance,
scouting out target areas, searching for closer access routes, etc..  This
turned out to be much more fun than anticipated. And it's just a natural
consequence of several apparently simple game systems.

Complementing this was the addition of a deadly water creature that makes a
characteristic double-splash sound (itself the consequence of its jump ability
plus the way the gravity system works).  The player quickly learns the
significance of this sound and to fear it, esp. when deep-diving. Then he
learns to fear the *absence* of this sound, which often signifies that the
creature has moved deep underwater, and therefore could be nearby!  Resulting
in a deliciously roguelike experience of sweaty hands in *both* cases.  :-D

A bunch of other foundational things were implemented: a tutorial level and an
in-game help screen to make it easier for new players to learn the controls, a
goal-driven AI that's starting to take shape, an inventory UI and pickable /
droppable / equippable items, and a bunch of other new features and
improvements.  A high-score board with humorous blurbs for each game outcome.

All in all, a year of significant progress, even if it's less than one might
have desired.


**2021 Outlook**

This year began with a bang:

* Spiral staircases were added, in a way that's peculiar to 4D: in 3D, spiral
  staircases spiral around a central column and occupies (at least) a space of
  two widths of its steps horizontally. In 4D, however, it's possible to
  construct a spiral staircase that's only the width of a single step, and the
  steps can attach directly to the wall without a central column -- a *flat*
  wall! -- and yet spiral upwards circularly. Very mind-bending, and lots of
  fun.  This is the first of a series of 4D-specific geometric features that
  I'm looking forward to add this year!

* Extended the current serialization system to handle runtime-polymorphic
  objects.  This was a significant limitation last year that greatly limited
  what could be done with the map gen; this year, with this restriction lifted,
  I'm looking forward to significantly enhancing the map gen module and adding
  much more interesting level geometries and features.

* The gutting of last year's canned linear story progression in favor of a
  freer-form hub level structure where the player has more choice where to go
  and what to tackle in what order. This marks a significant from last year's
  gameplay style, and is closer to my original vision of the game. Looking
  forward to taking this further!

* For better or worse, I decided to open-source the code on Github.  No idea
  whether anybody will ever take any interest in it, but it's out there now.
  Let the patches flow! (I'm probably fooling myself, but one can dream. ðŸ˜‚)

Overall, lots to look forward to.


**Links**

* [Tetraworld website](http://eusebeia.dyndns.org/tetraworld/)
* [Tetraworld source code](https://github.com/blargdag/tetraworld)
